---
title: MiCall at BC CfE
---

The **MiCall** tool is designed to process **FASTQ** data generated by
the **Illumina MiSeq** sequencing platform. At _BC Centre for
Excellence in HIV/AIDS_, MiCall is primarily utilized for **HIV**
resistance testing, alongside research into various types of sequence
analysis, such as the examination of **proviral** sequences for
defects and other characteristics. As open-source software, MiCall
offers transparency and adaptability, meeting diverse research needs
by supporting the sequencing of various organisms and accommodating
the unique requirements of different studies. The tool is specialized
in deep sequencing of viral samples, differentiating it from the lab's
other sequencing tool, **ReCall**, which is employed for
population-level genomic sequencing. Our laboratory uses MiCall for
sequencing **HIV**, **HCV**, and **SARS-CoV-2**.

While, at our lab, the results obtained from MiCall are mainly intended for
research purposes and are not used in clinical settings, there is an
exception for specific **V3 loop** analysis requests. This particular
analysis aids in drug prescription decisions based on mutations in the
**V3** region of **HIV**. However, for general clinical results, the
lab relies on **ReCall**. MiCall remains an invaluable research tool,
offering comprehensive deep sequencing capabilities and robust
analysis of **proviral** sequences.

### MiCall operates in two modes:

- **Remapping Mode**
  In this mode, MiCall maps all reads from a sample against a set of
  reference sequences, updates the sequences, remaps the reads, then
  combines the reads into consensus sequences and coverage maps. This
  mode is typically used for clinical decisions.

- **De-Novo Assembly Mode**
  This mode assembles sequences from scratch without relying on a
  reference genome, then uses them to provide the same kinds of
  consensus sequences and coverage maps. Currently, it is used
  exclusively for research purposes.

The operational behavior of MiCall is highly automated to ensure that
results are generated without the need for manual intervention. This
automation allows researchers to focus on interpreting sequencing data
rather than managing the pipeline itself. This is particularly
beneficial for labs with high throughput, providing timely and
consistent data processing.

### MiCall programmatically interacts with several systems:

- **QAI** - our general **Laboratory Information Management System**.
  Files that define individual runs (these are the `SampleSheet.xml`
  files) are produced via QAI's graphical interface and placed in a
  specific network location (`/MiSeq/runs/` directory on the
  network-mounted **RAW_DATA** drive) monitored by
  MiCall. Additionally, MiCall utilizes QAI's web server **REST**
  interface to update the database with new run results.

- **CFE-scripts** - a collection of scripts responsible for producing resistance interpretation reports.
  These scripts monitor available and unprocessed results produced by
  MiCall, extract and reshape them, and upload them to the
  laboratory's database. More specifically, the `miseq_gen_results.rb`
  script polls MiCall's resistance interpretation scores, stored in
  the same location as all other inputs and outputs, and uploads all
  fresh ones.

- **Kive** - our platform for version control of bioinformatic pipelines.
  MiCall uses the **Python** interface of Kive to initiate new jobs,
  upload inputs, and download processing results.

- **MiSeq Hardware** - the physical machines that perform sequencing for the laboratory.
  Internally, MiCall consistently monitors specific network locations
  for new data from the **MiSeq** sequencers. This data, in the form
  of **FASTQ** files (and supporting files, like those containing the
  read quality information), triggers MiCall to interact with Kive to
  initiate and manage analysis workflows.

MiCall incorporates several features that enhance the quality and
reliability of sequence analysis. It can be executed using **Docker**
for simpler setups or via **Singularity** containers within the
**Kive** platform for production use. Singularity provides lightweight
and reproducible environments suited for high-performance computing
contexts. Combined with Kive, this ensures that MiCall can operate
efficiently at scale, facilitating reliable and scalable deployment.
